feat(docs): documentation explaining how tools fit together (#2337)
leanprover-community/mathlib: docs/tools.md

# The Lean tool chain

## Introduction

In this document we explain how all the various pieces of the Lean tools ecosystem fit together. 
Understanding this precisely is not required, but it will help if you decide to explore non-recommended setups.
In particular we will gradually introduce new pieces in the story, starting with a bare bone Lean. 
This is *not* the recommended setup.
Also this document is long, that's the price for not wanting to blindly follow the recommended setup instructions.

## Installing Lean and checking files

### Installing Lean

Of course the main piece is Lean itself. You can download Lean binaries for your OS [here](https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean/releases). 
This contains folders `bin`, `include` and `lib`.
The `bin` folder contains a `lean` executable which you can run.

> That's all, Lean is installed!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's the bare minimum necessary to run Lean files!
```

This document explains two thing: 1) how the tooling fits together under the hood, 2) and how to make a non-recommended setup.

This section is the only section that causes the reader to end up with a non-recommended setup.  The other sections are completely safe and do not require a non-recommended setup at all.  I think it should come with a bigger warning.

I expect that a lot of people will read this text to learn more about the internals.  Those people should still use `elan`, `leanproject`, etc.

> You can make it slightly more convenient to use by ensuring this `bin` folder is in your path, or maybe by creating a link to 

Reviewer 2: Maybe, we could mention popular distros installation? Archlinux, Gentoo, NixOS, etc. I don't know if it makes sense.
I mean, as we're in a non-recommended setup, we could go as well explain how to have your own patched version of Lean and compile it.

Author: I don't think the linux Lean binaries assume anything about your distro. It's true that we see people on Zulip from time to time that insist on compiling Lean, but this is somewhat orthogonal to what is discussed in this document. This section is partly an answer to people who don't understand anything about how tools fit together and complain on Zulip that Lean is hard to install (or depend on python or whatever).

Reviewer 2: Alright, I see more the target of this document

zero_max 1
```
Trying to compile it with `lean test2.lean` fails: Lean complains it doesn't know about
our `zero_max` lemma.
You need to tell Lean that `test2.lean` relies on `test.lean`. 
So add at the top of `test2.lean` the line `import test`.
Now Lean complains it cannot find the file `test` in `LEAN_PATH`.
You can ask Lean where it searches for files by running `lean --path`, and paying attention
to the lines in the "path" list.
Notice this list does not contain the folder where `test.lean` is sitting.
That all caps name in the error message suggests setting an environment variable called `LEAN_PATH` could help.
Indeed you can run:
```bash
LEAN_PATH=path_to_our_lean_install_folder/lib/lean/library/:path_to_folder_containing_test lean test2.lean 
```
and this succeeds.
Note that omitting the first part would have brought you to the prelude situation where Lean does not know
about natural numbers or equality.

Setting this `LEAN_PATH` variable is clearly annoying.
There is a much better way, and actually you should *never* set this environment variable.
Now create, next to `test.lean` and `test2.lean`, a file `leanpkg.path` containing:
```
builtin_path
path .
```

> That's it, each time you'll invoke Lean from within this folder or one of its subfolders,

Reviewer 3: I think it would be good to mention at this point that the way `builtin_path` is resolved is by going to `../library` and `../lib/lean/library` relative to the location of the executing lean process. Usually lean will be at `lean-install-dir/bin/lean` and so this will go to either `lean-install-dir/bin/library` (which is used when you build the repo) or  `lean-install-dir/bin/lib/lean/library` (which is used when you use the bare binary distribution).

```
{ "command": "info", "file_name": "test.lean", "line": 1, "column": 27, "seq_num": 2 } 
```
Lean's answer will include the location of the file defining `max` as well as the type of
`max`.

Now tell Lean you want to modify the file `test.lean` to remove the final `m` at the end (you're only pretending to do this modification, nothing will be written in the file here):
```
{ "command": "sync", "file_name": "test.lean", "content": "lemma zero_max (m : ℕ) : max 0 m = m :=\nmax_eq_right (nat.zero_le)", "seq_num": 3 }
```
Lean will immediately reply with the error message we saw earlier,
complaining that `nat.zero_le` has type `∀ (n : ℕ), 0 ≤ n` but is expected to have type `0 ≤ m`.

By now you should be tired of interacting directly with Lean's interactive mode.
It's time to install an editor having some plugin that will do the talking with
`lean --server`.
Currently you get to choose between emacs and VS code.
That editor plugin will also be in charge of finding the `lean` executable and starting `lean --server`
inside the directory containing the `leanpkg.path` that you carefully crafted in the previous section.

> ##  Handling dependencies

Reviewer 2: very minor: there is an extra space here

Author: Yes, I was fighting random markdown rendering. Sometimes you need to add random spaces for headers to work. :man_shrugging:

Your current project only has two files, `test.lean` and `test2.lean` which
both depend on part of Lean's core library.
But you want to start using what other people did, so you'll need other Lean files,
for instance from [mathlib](https://github.com/leanprover-community/mathlib).
You could download mathlib, and add a line to your `leanpkg.path` pointing to 
`mathlib/src`.
But of course you'll want to put your project under version control without versioning mathlib,
which is already versioned somewhere else.
And you want to update mathlib regularly to enjoy all the latest goodies.

> And mathlib is very long to compile (ie. making olean files), so you'd like to get a precompiled version.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
And mathlib is very long to compile (i.e., making olean files), so you'd like to get a precompiled version.
```
